Linguistics is the scientific[1] study of language.[2] There are broadly three aspects to the study, which include language form, language meaning, and language in context.[3] The earliest known activities in the description of language have been attributed to Pāṇini around 500 BCE, with his analysis of Sanskrit in Ashtadhyayi.[4]

Linguistics analyzes human language as a system for relating sounds (or signed gestures) and meaning.[5] Phonetics studies acoustic and articulatory properties of the production and perception of speech sounds and non-speech sounds. The study of language meaning, on the other hand, deals with how languages encode relations between entites, properties, and other aspects of the world to convey, process, and assign meaning, as well as to manage and resolve ambiguity. While the study of semantics typically is concerned with truth conditions, pragmatics deals with how meanings are influenced by context.[6]

Grammar is the system of rules which governs the form of the utterances in a given language. It encompasses both sound and meaning, and includes phonology (how sounds function and pattern together), morphology (the formation and composition of words), and syntax (the formation and composition of phrases and sentences from these words).[7]

In the early 20th century, Ferdinand de Saussure distinguished between the notions of langue and parole in his formulation of structural linguistics. According to him, parole is the specific utterance of speech, whereas langue refers to an abstract phenomenon that theoretically defines the principles and system of rules that govern a language.[8] This distinction is reminiscent of the one made by Noam Chomsky between competence and performance, where competence is individual's ideal knowledge of a language, while performance is the specific way in which it is used.[9]

The formal study of language has led to the growth of fields like psycholinguistics, which explores the representation and function of language in the mind; neurolinguistics, which studies language processing in the brain; and language acquisition, which investigates on how children and adults acquire a particular language.

Linguistics also includes nonformal approaches to the study of other aspects of human language, such as social, cultural, historical and political factors.[10] The study of cultural discourses and dialects is the domain of sociolinguistics, which looks at the relation between linguistic variation and social structures, as well as that of discourse analysis, which involves the structure of texts and conversations.[11] Research on language through historical and evolutionary linguistics focuses on how languages change, and the origin and growth of languages, particularly over an extended period of time.

Corpus linguistics takes naturally occurring texts as its primary object of analysis, and studies the variation of grammatical and other features based on such corpora. Stylistics is the study of patterns of style, within a written as well as spoken discourse.[12] Language documentation combines anthropological inquiry with linguistic inquiry to describe languages and their grammars. Lexicography is the study and creation of dictionaries. Computational linguistics applies computer technology to address questions in theoretical linguistics, as well as to create applications for use in parsing, data retrieval, machine translation, and other areas. Actual knowledge of a language can be applied in the teaching of it as a second or foreign language. Policy makers work with the government to implement new plans in education and teaching which are based on linguistic research.

Areas of study related to linguistics include semiotics, the study of signs and symbols both within language and without, literary criticism, translation, and speech-language pathology.
